Experimental Design

AP Biology

Hypotheses
Null hypothesis
Hypothesis that there is no significant effect, difference, or trend (the opposite of the alternative hypothesis)

Alternative hypothesis
Hypothesis that there is a significant effect, difference, or trend (the opposite of the null hypothesis)
Does light color affect plant growth?
Null hypothesis - Light color does not affect plant growth. 
Alternative hypothesis - Light color does affect plant growth. 

Global average for this question: 1.43

Variables
Independent
The actual thing being change and tested during the expeirment

Dependent
The response to the independent variable; what will be measured to determine the effect of the independent variable 


Does light color affect plant growth?

Independent variable - Light color 

Dependent variable - Plant growth

Global average for this question: 1.43

Variables
Control
Held constant through the experiment so they do not affect the outcome 

Only light color is different
Type of plant, amount of water, type of soil, temperature, light intensity, etc. are the same

Groups
Experimental
The group that receives the independent variable in order to test it

Control
The group that does not receive the independent variable in order to be able to compare the results of the experimental group 
Positive  - expect a result
Negative - expect no result

Global average: 1.54

Graphing
When graphing, remember DRY MIX
	Dependent			Manipulated
	Responding			Independent
	Y-axis				X-axis
Does light color affect plant growth?

Types of Graphs
Scatterplots - 
Qualitative data but there was not a manipulated variable or multiple trials
Typically include a trend line
Line - 
To show change in the dependent variable over time or some continuum


Types of Graphs
Histogram -  
Frequency distribution
Bars touch
X axis represents a range

Bar - 
Frequency distribution
Bars do not touch
X axis represents categories

Types of Graphs 
Box & whisker plot - 
Compare the variability of 2+ groups of data
Pie - 
Compare categories

This wording is a little different from what you learned in Statistics. Use this wording for biology.
Interpreting Results
Error bars
Represent +/- 2SEM
If error bars overlap → not a significant difference between the means
If error bars do not overlap → significant difference between the means 

Global average 1.57

Standard Deviation and Standard Error of the Mean

Interpreting Results
Chi square
X2 > critical value → significance difference between observed and expected → reject null hypothesis
X2 < critical value → not a significant difference between observed and expected → fail to reject null hypothesis
In pea plants, tall (T) is dominant to short (t). A crop of pea plants produced 64 tall plants and 36 short plants. Does this fit the expected ratio?
Phenotype
o
e
(o-e)
(o-e)2
(o-e)2/e
Tall
64
100 x 0.75 = 75
64 - 75 = -11
(-11)2 = 121
121/75 = 1.61
Short
36
100 x 0.25 =  25
36 - 25 = 11
(11)2 = 121
121/25 = 4.84
100 total
X2 = 1.61 + 4.84 
     = 6.45
X2 > critical value (6.45 > 3.84) → rejejct null hypothesis; does not fit expected ratio

Chi Squared

Writing a Conclusion
Based on the data from an experiment, write a conclusion using the CER format. 
Claim  - Write a statement that responds to the question that was investigated.
Evidence  - Provide data from your evidence to support your claim. 
Reasoning  - Explain how your data supports your claim. 

CER Example

CER Example
Claim - Her dad is an alien.
Evidence - He speaks a weird language, has a spaceship, is from a place with a weird name, drinks green stuff, and looks funny.
Reasoning - The little girl’s dad is an alien. Aliens drink green stuff and they speak a weird language. They have spaceships to travel in. Aliens also look funny. They come from places that have weird names. They also walk funny. The little girl’s dad drinks green stuff, he has a space ship of his own and he walks weird. He also looks weird, like an alien. Her dad speaks a weird language and finally, he is from a place with a weird name. Therefore, her dad is an alien.
