Unit 1




Properties of Water
Overview: The Molecule That Supports All of Life
Water is the biological medium on Earth.
All living organisms require water more than any other substance.
Most cells are surrounded by water, and cells themselves are about 70–95% water.
The abundance of water is the main reason the Earth is habitable.
The polarity of water molecules results in hydrogen bonding
opposite ends have opposite charges.
hydrogen bonds
Four of water’s properties that facilitate an environment for life are:
Cohesive behavior
Ability to moderate temperature: Stable
Expansion upon freezing:  Less dense Ice floats
Versatility as a solvent.

Water Properties 

Cohesion: hydrogen bonds hold water molecules together
Plants: transport of water against gravity
Adhesion: attraction between different substances, ie water and plant cell walls
Surface tension: hard it is to break the surface of a liquid; related to cohesion



Moderation of Temperature
Water absorbs heat from warmer air and releases stored heat to cooler air.  STABLE.
Water can absorb or release a large amount of heat with only a slight change in its own temperature  =  high specific heat.
Kinetic energy: energy of motion.
Heat: total amount of kinetic energy due to molecular motion.
Temperature: heat intensity from average kinetic energy

calorie: heat required to raise the temperature of 1 g of water by 1°C.
“Calories” on food packages 
kilocalories (kcal), 1 kcal = 1,000 cal.
joule (J) energy unit; 1 cal = 4.184 J
.

specific heat : amount of heat that must be absorbed or lost for 1 g of that substance to change its temperature by 1ºC
water = 1 cal/g/ºC; high specific heat = STABLE 	
high specific heat  hydrogen bonds
Heat is absorbed  hydrogen bonds break.
Heat is released  hydrogen bonds form.
The high specific heat of water minimizes temperature fluctuations to within limits that permit life.

Evaporative Cooling
Evaporation: liquid to gas.
Heat of vaporization: heat a liquid must absorb for 1 g to be converted to gas.
Evaporative cooling: as a liquid evaporates, its remaining surface cools. 
helps stabilize temperatures in organisms and bodies of water
Insulation of Bodies of Water by Floating Ice
Ice floats: hydrogen bonds in ice are more “ordered,” less dense.
greatest density at 4°C.
If ice sank, all bodies of water would eventually freeze solid life impossible

The Solvent of Life
solution: homogeneous mixture of substances.
Solvent: dissolving agent &  Solute: dissolved substance
aqueous solution: water is the solvent; polarity & hydrogen bonds
hydration shell: ionic compound is dissolved in water, each ion is surrounded by a sphere of water molecules
Water can also dissolve nonionic polar molecules and large ionic, polar molecules, proteins
Colloid: stable suspension of fine particles in a liquid.

Solute Concentration in Aqueous Solutions
biochemical reactions occur in water.
collisions of molecules 
concentration of solutes in aqueous solution
Molecular mass: sum of all masses of all atoms in a molecule.
Avogadro’s number : 6.02 x 1023 daltons = 1 g
1 mole (mol) = 6.02 x 1023
Molarity (M): moles of solute /L of solution
Acids and Bases and pH
pH = –log [H+]
Acidic < 7, basic (alkaline) < 7, or neutral=7
H2O + H2O  H3O+  + OH-
Acid: increases H+; Base: reduces H+
Adding certain solutes, called acids and bases, modifies the concentrations of H+ and OH–  and changes pH
drastically affect the chemistry of a cell
biological fluids have pH values: 6 to 8
Buffer: mixture of a weak acid and a weak base that minimize pH changes when an acid or base is added to a solution 


Threats to Water Quality on Earth
Acid precipitation: to rain, snow, or fog with a pH lower than 5.6; Acid rain: pH < 5.6
caused by mixing of different pollutants with water in the air 
fall at some distance from the source of pollutants.
damage life in lakes and streams.
acid precipitation on soil chemistry are contributing to forest decline


Human activities, burning fossil fuels,  threaten water quality.
fossil fuel combustion releases CO2 
greenhouse effect
Acidification of the oceans: decrease in the ability of corals to form calcified reefs


You should now be able to:
List and explain the four properties of water that emerge as a result of its ability to form hydrogen bonds.
Distinguish between the following sets of terms: hydrophobic and hydrophilic substances; a solute, a solvent, and a solution.
Define acid, base, and pH.
Explain how buffers work.

